;; Scheduling description for the SPARC M8.
;;   Copyright (C) 2017-2021 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
;;
;; This file is part of GCC.
;;
;; GCC is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
;; it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
;; the Free Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
;; any later version.
;;
;; GCC is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
;; but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
;; MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
;; GNU General Public License for more details.
;;
;; You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
;; along with GCC; see the file COPYING3.  If not see
;; <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

;; Thigs to improve:
;;
;; - Store instructions are implemented by micro-ops, one of which
;;   generates the store address and is executed in the store address
;;   generation unit in the slot0.  We need to model that.
;;
;; - There are two V3 pipes connected to different slots.  The current
;;   implementation assumes that all the instructions executing in a
;;   V3 pipe are issued to the unit in slot3.
;;
;; - Single-issue ALU operations incur an additional cycle of latency to
;;   slot 0 and slot 1 instructions.  This is not currently reflected
;;   in the DFA.

(define_automaton "m8_0")

;; The S5 core has two dual-issue queues, PQLS and PQEX.  Each queue
;; is divided into two slots: PQLS corresponds to slots 0 and 1, and
;; PQEX corresponds to slots 2 and 3.  The core can issue 4
;; instructions per-cycle, and up to 4 instructions are committed each
;; cycle.
;;
;;                            
;;                   m8_slot0  - Load Unit.
;;                             - Store address gen. Unit.
;;                                                       
;;                            
;;   === PQLS ==>    m8_slot1  - Store data unit.
;;                             - Branch unit.
;;                                            
;;                             
;;   === PQEX ==>    m8_slot2  - Integer Unit (EXU2).                     
;;                             - 3-cycles Crypto Unit (SPU2).
;;                                                     
;;                   m8_slot3  - Integer Unit (EXU3).
;;                             - 3-cycles Crypto Unit (SPU3).
;;                             - Floating-point and graphics unit (FPG).
;;                             - Long-latency Crypto Unit.
;;                             - Oracle Numbers Unit (ONU).

(define_cpu_unit "m8_slot0,m8_slot1,m8_slot2,m8_slot3" "m8_0")

;; Some instructions stall the pipeline and avoid any other
;; instruction to be issued in the same cycle.  We assume the same for
;; multi-instruction insns.

(define_reservation "m8_single_issue" "m8_slot0 + m8_slot1 + m8_slot2 + m8_slot3")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_single" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "multi,savew,flushw,trap,bmask"))
  "m8_single_issue")

;; Most of the instructions executing in the integer units have a
;; latency of 1.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_integer" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "ialu,ialuX,shift,cmove,compare,bmask"))
  "(m8_slot2 | m8_slot3)")

;; Flushing the instruction memory takes 27 cycles.


(define_insn_reservation "m8_iflush" 27
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "iflush"))
  "(m8_slot2 | m8_slot3), nothing*26")

;; The integer multiplication instructions have a latency of 10 cycles
;; and execute in integer units.
;;
;; Likewise for array*, edge* and pdistn instructions.
;;
;; However, the latency is only 9 cycles if the consumer of the
;; operation is also capable of 9 cycles latency.  We model this with
;; a bypass.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_imul" 10
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "imul,array,edge,edgen,pdistn"))
  "(m8_slot2 | m8_slot3), nothing*12")

(define_bypass 9 "m8_imul" "m8_imul")

;; The integer division instructions `sdiv' and `udivx' have a latency
;; of 30 cycles and execute in integer units.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_idiv" 30
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "idiv"))
  "(m8_slot2 | m8_slot3), nothing*29")

;; Both integer and floating-point load instructions have a latency of
;; only 3 cycles,and execute in the slot0.
;;
;; Misaligned load instructions feature a latency of 11 cycles.
;;
;; The prefetch instruction also executes in the load unit, but it's
;; latency is only 1 cycle.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_load" 3
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (ior (eq_attr "type" "fpload,sload")
            (and (eq_attr "type" "load")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "regular"))))
  "m8_slot0, nothing*2")

;; (define_insn_reservation "m8_load_misalign" 11
;;  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
;;       (eq_attr "type" "load_mis,fpload_mis"))
;;  "m8_slot0, nothing*10")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_prefetch" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "load")
       (eq_attr "subtype" "prefetch"))
  "m8_slot0")

;; Both integer and floating-point store instructions have a latency
;; of 1 cycle, and execute in the store data unit in slot1.
;;
;; However, misaligned store instructions feature a latency of 3
;; cycles.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_store" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "store,fpstore"))
  "m8_slot1")

;; (define_insn_reservation "m8_store_misalign" 3
;;   (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
;;        (eq_attr "type" "store_mis,fpstore_mis"))
;;   "m8_slot1, nothing*2")

;; Control-transfer instructions execute in the Branch Unit in the
;; slot1.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_cti" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "cbcond,uncond_cbcond,branch,call,sibcall,call_no_delay_slot,uncond_branch,return"))
  "m8_slot1")

;; Many instructions executing in the Floating-point and Graphics Unit
;; (FGU) serving slot3 feature a default latency of 9 cycles.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_fp" 9
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (ior (eq_attr "type" "fpmove,fpcmove,fpcrmove,fp,fpcmp,fpmul,fgm_pack,fgm_mul,pdist")
            (and (eq_attr "type" "fga")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "fpu"))))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*8")

;; Floating-point division and floating-point square-root instructions
;; have high latencies.  They execute in the FGU.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_fpdivs" 26
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "fpdivs"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*25")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_fpsqrts" 33
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "fpsqrts"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*32")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_fpdivd" 30
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "fpdivd"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*29")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_fpsqrtd" 41
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "fpsqrtd"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*40")

;; SIMD VIS instructions executing in the Floating-point and graphics
;; unit (FPG) in slot3 usually have a latency of 5 cycles.
;;
;; However, the latency for many instructions is only 3 cycles if the
;; consumer can also be executed in 3 cycles.  We model this with a
;; bypass.  In these cases the instructions are executed in one of the
;; two 3-cycle crypto units (SPU, also known as "v3-pipes") in slots 2
;; and 3.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_vis" 5
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (ior (eq_attr "type" "viscmp,lzd")
            (and (eq_attr "type" "fga")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "maxmin,cmask,other"))
            (and (eq_attr "type" "vismv")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "single,movstouw"))
            (and (eq_attr "type" "visl")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "single"))))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*4")

(define_bypass 3 "m8_vis" "m8_vis")

(define_insn_reservation "m8_gsr" 5
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "gsr")
       (eq_attr "subtype" "alignaddr"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*4")

;; A few VIS instructions have a latency of 1.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_vis_1cycle" 1
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (ior (and (eq_attr "type" "vismv")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "double,movxtod,movdtox"))
            (and (eq_attr "type" "visl")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "double"))
            (and (eq_attr "type" "fga")
                 (eq_attr "subtype" "addsub64"))))
  "m8_slot3")

;; Reading and writing to the gsr register takes more than 70 cycles.

(define_insn_reservation "m8_gsr_reg" 70
  (and (eq_attr "cpu" "m8")
       (eq_attr "type" "gsr")
       (eq_attr "subtype" "reg"))
  "m8_slot3, nothing*69")
