.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md, before:

<!-- Please fill out the issue template included below, failure to do -->
<!-- so may result in immediate closure of your issue. -->

<!-- Fill out all portions of this template that apply. Please delete -->
<!-- any unnecessary sections. -->

<!-- PRO TIP! Submit the pull request *before* you check any -->
<!-- checkboxes. Then, use the gui/web interface to check the -->
<!-- checkboxes! -->

Please make sure to put any logs, terminal output, or code in
[fenced code blocks]. 

# Defect/Bug Report #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `Defect:` followed by a
succinct title.

<!-- THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS MANDATORY if you would like our help -->

- GCC Version used to build this fork: <!-- `gcc --version` -->
- Output of `uname -a`:
- Machine architecture and number of physical cores:

## Observed Behavior ##

## Expected Behavior ##

## Steps to Reproduce ##

# Question #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `Question:` followed by a
succinct title. Add the text of your question here. Be specific. Search for
answers on [Google] and [Stack Overflow]
before asking a new question

# Request for Enhancement (RFE) #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `RFE:` followed by a succinct
title.  If you are willing to help out, please review the [Contributing to GCC] 
page.

[links]:#
[Google]: https://www.google.com
[Stack Overflow]: https://stackoverflow.com
[fenced codeblocks]: https://help.github.com/articles/creating-and-highlighting-code-blocks/
[CONTRIBUTING.md]: https://github.com/sourceryinstitute/OpenCoarrays/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
[Helping Out]: https://github.com/sourceryinstitute/OpenCoarrays/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#helping-out
[Contributing to GCC]: https://gcc.gnu.org/contribute.html

Commit message:

Request release tag or git hash in issue template

.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE.md, after:

<!-- Please fill out the issue template included below, failure to do -->
<!-- so may result in immediate closure of your issue. -->

<!-- Fill out all portions of this template that apply. Please delete -->
<!-- any unnecessary sections. -->

<!-- PRO TIP! Submit the pull request *before* you check any -->
<!-- checkboxes. Then, use the gui/web interface to check the -->
<!-- checkboxes! -->

Please make sure to put any logs, terminal output, or code in
[fenced code blocks]. 

# Defect/Bug Report #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `Defect:` followed by a
succinct title.

<!-- THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IS MANDATORY if you would like our help -->

- GCC fork release tag or git hash: <!-- e.g., teams-20170921 or `git rev-parse --short HEAD`  -->
- GCC version used to build this fork: <!-- `gcc --version` -->
- Output of `uname -a`:
- Machine architecture and number of physical cores:

## Observed Behavior ##

## Expected Behavior ##

## Steps to Reproduce ##

# Question #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `Question:` followed by a
succinct title. Add the text of your question here. Be specific. Search for
answers on [Google] and [Stack Overflow]
before asking a new question

# Request for Enhancement (RFE) #

<!-- delete this section if it does not apply -->
The title of the issue should start with `RFE:` followed by a succinct
title.  If you are willing to help out, please review the [Contributing to GCC] 
page.

[links]:#
[Google]: https://www.google.com
[Stack Overflow]: https://stackoverflow.com
[fenced codeblocks]: https://help.github.com/articles/creating-and-highlighting-code-blocks/
[CONTRIBUTING.md]: https://github.com/sourceryinstitute/OpenCoarrays/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md
[Helping Out]: https://github.com/sourceryinstitute/OpenCoarrays/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#helping-out
[Contributing to GCC]: https://gcc.gnu.org/contribute.html
