..
  Copyright 1988-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
  This is part of the GCC manual.
  For copying conditions, see the copyright.rst file.

.. program:: RX

.. index:: RX Options

.. _rx-options:

RX Options
^^^^^^^^^^

These command-line options are defined for RX targets:

.. option:: -m64bit-doubles, -m32bit-doubles

  Make the ``double`` data type be 64 bits (:option:`-m64bit-doubles`)
  or 32 bits (:option:`-m32bit-doubles`) in size.  The default is
  :option:`-m32bit-doubles`.

  .. note::

    RX floating-point hardware only
    works on 32-bit values, which is why the default is
    :option:`-m32bit-doubles`.

.. option:: -fpu, -nofpu

  Enables (:option:`-fpu`) or disables (:option:`-nofpu`) the use of RX
  floating-point hardware.  The default is enabled for the RX600
  series and disabled for the RX200 series.

  Floating-point instructions are only generated for 32-bit floating-point
  values, however, so the FPU hardware is not used for doubles if the
  :option:`-m64bit-doubles` option is used.

  .. note::

    If the :option:`-fpu` option is enabled then
    :option:`-funsafe-math-optimizations` is also enabled automatically.
    This is because the RX FPU instructions are themselves unsafe.

.. option:: -mcpu={name}

  Selects the type of RX CPU to be targeted.  Currently three types are
  supported, the generic :samp:`RX600` and :samp:`RX200` series hardware and
  the specific :samp:`RX610` CPU.  The default is :samp:`RX600`.

  The only difference between :samp:`RX600` and :samp:`RX610` is that the
  :samp:`RX610` does not support the ``MVTIPL`` instruction.

  The :samp:`RX200` series does not have a hardware floating-point unit
  and so :option:`-nofpu` is enabled by default when this type is
  selected.

.. option:: -mbig-endian-data, -mlittle-endian-data

  Store data (but not code) in the big-endian format.  The default is
  :option:`-mlittle-endian-data`, i.e. to store data in the little-endian
  format.

.. option:: -msmall-data-limit={N}

  Specifies the maximum size in bytes of global and static variables
  which can be placed into the small data area.  Using the small data
  area can lead to smaller and faster code, but the size of area is
  limited and it is up to the programmer to ensure that the area does
  not overflow.  Also when the small data area is used one of the RX's
  registers (usually ``r13``) is reserved for use pointing to this
  area, so it is no longer available for use by the compiler.  This
  could result in slower and/or larger code if variables are pushed onto
  the stack instead of being held in this register.

  .. note::

    Common variables (variables that have not been initialized) and
    constants are not placed into the small data area as they are assigned
    to other sections in the output executable.

  The default value is zero, which disables this feature.  Note, this
  feature is not enabled by default with higher optimization levels
  (:option:`-O2` etc) because of the potentially detrimental effects of
  reserving a register.  It is up to the programmer to experiment and
  discover whether this feature is of benefit to their program.  See the
  description of the :option:`-mpid` option for a description of how the
  actual register to hold the small data area pointer is chosen.

.. option:: -msim, -mno-sim

  Use the simulator runtime.  The default is to use the libgloss
  board-specific runtime.

.. option:: -mas100-syntax, -mno-as100-syntax

  When generating assembler output use a syntax that is compatible with
  Renesas's AS100 assembler.  This syntax can also be handled by the GAS
  assembler, but it has some restrictions so it is not generated by default.

.. option:: -mmax-constant-size={N}

  Specifies the maximum size, in bytes, of a constant that can be used as
  an operand in a RX instruction.  Although the RX instruction set does
  allow constants of up to 4 bytes in length to be used in instructions,
  a longer value equates to a longer instruction.  Thus in some
  circumstances it can be beneficial to restrict the size of constants
  that are used in instructions.  Constants that are too big are instead
  placed into a constant pool and referenced via register indirection.

  The value :samp:`{N}` can be between 0 and 4.  A value of 0 (the default)
  or 4 means that constants of any size are allowed.

.. option:: -mrelax

  Enable linker relaxation.  Linker relaxation is a process whereby the
  linker attempts to reduce the size of a program by finding shorter
  versions of various instructions.  Disabled by default.

.. option:: -mint-register={N}

  Specify the number of registers to reserve for fast interrupt handler
  functions.  The value :samp:`{N}` can be between 0 and 4.  A value of 1
  means that register ``r13`` is reserved for the exclusive use
  of fast interrupt handlers.  A value of 2 reserves ``r13`` and
  ``r12``.  A value of 3 reserves ``r13``, ``r12`` and
  ``r11``, and a value of 4 reserves ``r13`` through ``r10``.
  A value of 0, the default, does not reserve any registers.

.. option:: -msave-acc-in-interrupts

  Specifies that interrupt handler functions should preserve the
  accumulator register.  This is only necessary if normal code might use
  the accumulator register, for example because it performs 64-bit
  multiplications.  The default is to ignore the accumulator as this
  makes the interrupt handlers faster.

.. option:: -mpid, -mno-pid

  Enables the generation of position independent data.  When enabled any
  access to constant data is done via an offset from a base address
  held in a register.  This allows the location of constant data to be
  determined at run time without requiring the executable to be
  relocated, which is a benefit to embedded applications with tight
  memory constraints.  Data that can be modified is not affected by this
  option.

  Note, using this feature reserves a register, usually ``r13``, for
  the constant data base address.  This can result in slower and/or
  larger code, especially in complicated functions.

  The actual register chosen to hold the constant data base address
  depends upon whether the :option:`-msmall-data-limit` and/or the
  :option:`-mint-register` command-line options are enabled.  Starting
  with register ``r13`` and proceeding downwards, registers are
  allocated first to satisfy the requirements of :option:`-mint-register`,
  then :option:`-mpid` and finally :option:`-msmall-data-limit`.  Thus it
  is possible for the small data area register to be ``r8`` if both
  :option:`-mint-register=4` and :option:`-mpid` are specified on the
  command line.

  By default this feature is not enabled.  The default can be restored
  via the :option:`-mno-pid` command-line option.

.. option:: -mno-warn-multiple-fast-interrupts, -mwarn-multiple-fast-interrupts

  Prevents GCC from issuing a warning message if it finds more than one
  fast interrupt handler when it is compiling a file.  The default is to
  issue a warning for each extra fast interrupt handler found, as the RX
  only supports one such interrupt.

.. option:: -mallow-string-insns, -mno-allow-string-insns

  Enables or disables the use of the string manipulation instructions
  ``SMOVF``, ``SCMPU``, ``SMOVB``, ``SMOVU``, ``SUNTIL``
  ``SWHILE`` and also the ``RMPA`` instruction.  These
  instructions may prefetch data, which is not safe to do if accessing
  an I/O register.  (See section 12.2.7 of the RX62N Group User's Manual
  for more information).

  The default is to allow these instructions, but it is not possible for
  GCC to reliably detect all circumstances where a string instruction
  might be used to access an I/O register, so their use cannot be
  disabled automatically.  Instead it is reliant upon the programmer to
  use the :option:`-mno-allow-string-insns` option if their program
  accesses I/O space.

  When the instructions are enabled GCC defines the C preprocessor
  symbol ``__RX_ALLOW_STRING_INSNS__``, otherwise it defines the
  symbol ``__RX_DISALLOW_STRING_INSNS__``.

.. option:: -mjsr, -mno-jsr

  Use only (or not only) ``JSR`` instructions to access functions.
  This option can be used when code size exceeds the range of ``BSR``
  instructions.  Note that :option:`-mno-jsr` does not mean to not use
  ``JSR`` but instead means that any type of branch may be used.

.. note::

  The generic GCC command-line option :option:`-ffixed-reg`
  has special significance to the RX port when used with the
  :rx-fn-attr:`interrupt` function attribute.  This attribute indicates a
  function intended to process fast interrupts.  GCC ensures
  that it only uses the registers ``r10``, ``r11``, ``r12``
  and/or ``r13`` and only provided that the normal use of the
  corresponding registers have been restricted via the
  :option:`-ffixed-reg` or :option:`-mint-register` command-line
  options.