..
  Copyright 1988-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
  This is part of the GCC manual.
  For copying conditions, see the copyright.rst file.

.. program:: x86 Windows

.. index:: x86 Windows Options, Windows Options for x86

.. _x86-windows-options:

x86 Windows Options
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

These additional options are available for Microsoft Windows targets:

.. option:: -mconsole

  This option
  specifies that a console application is to be generated, by
  instructing the linker to set the PE header subsystem type
  required for console applications.
  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets and is
  enabled by default on those targets.

.. option:: -mdll

  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
  specifies that a DLL---a dynamic link library---is to be
  generated, enabling the selection of the required runtime
  startup object and entry point.

.. option:: -mnop-fun-dllimport

  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
  specifies that the :microsoft-windows-fn-attr:`dllimport` attribute should be ignored.

.. option:: -mthreads

  This option is available for MinGW targets. It specifies
  that MinGW-specific thread support is to be used.

.. option:: -municode

  This option is available for MinGW-w64 targets.  It causes
  the ``UNICODE`` preprocessor macro to be predefined, and
  chooses Unicode-capable runtime startup code.

.. option:: -mwin32

  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
  specifies that the typical Microsoft Windows predefined macros are to
  be set in the pre-processor, but does not influence the choice
  of runtime library/startup code.

.. option:: -mwindows

  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
  specifies that a GUI application is to be generated by
  instructing the linker to set the PE header subsystem type
  appropriately.

.. option:: -fno-set-stack-executable

  This option is available for MinGW targets. It specifies that
  the executable flag for the stack used by nested functions isn't
  set. This is necessary for binaries running in kernel mode of
  Microsoft Windows, as there the User32 API, which is used to set executable
  privileges, isn't available.

.. option:: -fset-stack-executable

  Default setting; overrides :option:`-fno-set-stack-executable`.

.. option:: -fwritable-relocated-rdata

  This option is available for MinGW and Cygwin targets.  It specifies
  that relocated-data in read-only section is put into the ``.data``
  section.  This is a necessary for older runtimes not supporting
  modification of ``.rdata`` sections for pseudo-relocation.

.. option:: -fno-writable-relocated-rdata

  Default setting; overrides :option:`-fwritable-relocated-rdata`.

.. option:: -mpe-aligned-commons

  This option is available for Cygwin and MinGW targets.  It
  specifies that the GNU extension to the PE file format that
  permits the correct alignment of COMMON variables should be
  used when generating code.  It is enabled by default if
  GCC detects that the target assembler found during configuration
  supports the feature.

See also under :ref:`x86-options` for standard options.