..
  Copyright 1988-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
  This is part of the GCC manual.
  For copying conditions, see the copyright.rst file.

.. _s-390-system-z-built-in-functions:

S/390 System z Built-in Functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. function:: int __builtin_tbegin (void*)

  Generates the ``tbegin`` machine instruction starting a
  non-constrained hardware transaction.  If the parameter is non-NULL the
  memory area is used to store the transaction diagnostic buffer and
  will be passed as first operand to ``tbegin``.  This buffer can be
  defined using the ``struct __htm_tdb`` C struct defined in
  ``htmintrin.h`` and must reside on a double-word boundary.  The
  second tbegin operand is set to ``0xff0c``. This enables
  save/restore of all GPRs and disables aborts for FPR and AR
  manipulations inside the transaction body.  The condition code set by
  the tbegin instruction is returned as integer value.  The tbegin
  instruction by definition overwrites the content of all FPRs.  The
  compiler will generate code which saves and restores the FPRs.  For
  soft-float code it is recommended to used the ``*_nofloat``
  variant.  In order to prevent a TDB from being written it is required
  to pass a constant zero value as parameter.  Passing a zero value
  through a variable is not sufficient.  Although modifications of
  access registers inside the transaction will not trigger an
  transaction abort it is not supported to actually modify them.  Access
  registers do not get saved when entering a transaction. They will have
  undefined state when reaching the abort code.

Macros for the possible return codes of tbegin are defined in the
``htmintrin.h`` header file:

``_HTM_TBEGIN_STARTED``
  ``tbegin`` has been executed as part of normal processing.  The
  transaction body is supposed to be executed.

``_HTM_TBEGIN_INDETERMINATE``
  The transaction was aborted due to an indeterminate condition which
  might be persistent.

``_HTM_TBEGIN_TRANSIENT``
  The transaction aborted due to a transient failure.  The transaction
  should be re-executed in that case.

``_HTM_TBEGIN_PERSISTENT``
  The transaction aborted due to a persistent failure.  Re-execution
  under same circumstances will not be productive.

.. c:macro:: _HTM_FIRST_USER_ABORT_CODE

  The ``_HTM_FIRST_USER_ABORT_CODE`` defined in ``htmintrin.h``
  specifies the first abort code which can be used for
  ``__builtin_tabort``.  Values below this threshold are reserved for
  machine use.

.. index:: struct __htm_tdb

Data type struct __htm_tdbThe ``struct __htm_tdb`` defined in ``htmintrin.h`` describes
the structure of the transaction diagnostic block as specified in the
Principles of Operation manual chapter 5-91.

.. function:: int __builtin_tbegin_nofloat (void*)

  Same as ``__builtin_tbegin`` but without FPR saves and restores.
  Using this variant in code making use of FPRs will leave the FPRs in
  undefined state when entering the transaction abort handler code.

.. function:: int __builtin_tbegin_retry (void*, int)

  In addition to ``__builtin_tbegin`` a loop for transient failures
  is generated.  If tbegin returns a condition code of 2 the transaction
  will be retried as often as specified in the second argument.  The
  perform processor assist instruction is used to tell the CPU about the
  number of fails so far.

.. function:: int __builtin_tbegin_retry_nofloat (void*, int)

  Same as ``__builtin_tbegin_retry`` but without FPR saves and
  restores.  Using this variant in code making use of FPRs will leave
  the FPRs in undefined state when entering the transaction abort
  handler code.

.. function:: void __builtin_tbeginc (void)

  Generates the ``tbeginc`` machine instruction starting a constrained
  hardware transaction.  The second operand is set to ``0xff08``.

.. function:: int __builtin_tend (void)

  Generates the ``tend`` machine instruction finishing a transaction
  and making the changes visible to other threads.  The condition code
  generated by tend is returned as integer value.

.. function:: void __builtin_tabort (int)

  Generates the ``tabort`` machine instruction with the specified
  abort code.  Abort codes from 0 through 255 are reserved and will
  result in an error message.

.. function:: void __builtin_tx_assist (int)

  Generates the ``ppa rX,rY,1`` machine instruction.  Where the
  integer parameter is loaded into rX and a value of zero is loaded into
  rY.  The integer parameter specifies the number of times the
  transaction repeatedly aborted.

.. function:: int __builtin_tx_nesting_depth (void)

  Generates the ``etnd`` machine instruction.  The current nesting
  depth is returned as integer value.  For a nesting depth of 0 the code
  is not executed as part of an transaction.

.. function:: void __builtin_non_tx_store (uint64_t *, uint64_t)

  Generates the ``ntstg`` machine instruction.  The second argument
  is written to the first arguments location.  The store operation will
  not be rolled-back in case of an transaction abort.