@c Copyright (C) 2001, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GCC manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gcc.texi.

@c Common values used in the GCC manuals:

@set version-GCC 3.4.2

@c DEVELOPMENT is set to indicate an in-development version,
@c as compared to a release version.  When making a release
@c branch, clear this.
@clear DEVELOPMENT

@c Common macros to support generating man pages:

@macro gcctabopt{body}
@code{\body\}
@end macro
@macro gccoptlist{body}
@smallexample
\body\
@end smallexample
@end macro
@c Makeinfo handles the above macro OK, TeX needs manual line breaks;
@c they get lost at some point in handling the macro.  But if @macro is
@c used here rather than @alias, it produces double line breaks.
@iftex
@alias gol = *
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@macro gol
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@c For FSF printing, define FSFPRINT.  Also update the ISBN and last
@c printing date for the manual being printed.
@c @set FSFPRINT
@ifset FSFPRINT
@smallbook
@finalout
@c Cause even numbered pages to be printed on the left hand side of
@c the page and odd numbered pages to be printed on the right hand
@c side of the page.  Using this, you can print on both sides of a
@c sheet of paper and have the text on the same part of the sheet.

@c The text on right hand pages is pushed towards the right hand
@c margin and the text on left hand pages is pushed toward the left
@c hand margin.
@c (To provide the reverse effect, set bindingoffset to -0.75in.)
@tex
\global\bindingoffset=0.75in
\global\normaloffset =0.75in
@end tex
@end ifset
