\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename gupc
@settitle GNU project UPC compiler

@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@include gcc-common.texi

@c Copyright (C) 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 
@c 2010, 2011, 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Contributed by Gary Funck <gary@intrepid.com>
@c   and Nenad Vukicevic <nenad@intrepid.com>.
@c Based on original implementation
@c   by Jesse M. Draper <jdraper@super.org>
@c   and William W. Carlson <wwc@super.org>.

@ignore
@c man begin COPYRIGHT
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,
2005, 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the gfdl(7) man page.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@c man end
@c Set file name and title for the man page.
@end ignore

@ifinfo
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* GNU UPC: (gupc).           A GCC-based compiler for the UPC language
@end direntry

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title The GNU UPC Compiler
@versionsubtitle
@author Gary Funck and Nenad Vukicevic

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor@*
Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA@*
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@contents
@page

@node Top
@chapter @command{gupc}--- UPC compiler for parallel computers

@command{gupc} provides a compilation and execution environment for
programs written in the UPC (Unified Parallel C) language. 

@menu
* Gupc Intro::		Introduction to gupc.
* Threads::		Number of Execution Threads.
* Invoking Gupc::	How to use gupc.
* Gupc Options::	Gupc Options.
* Seealso::		Referencies.
* Gupc Bugs::		Report Gupc Problems.
* Contributors::	Gupc Contributors.
* Index::		Index.
@end menu

@node Gupc Intro
@section Introduction to @command{gupc}
@c man begin DESCRIPTION

@command{gupc} is an extension to the GNU Compiler Collection from the
Free Software Foundation.  In addition to the options specified here,
all of the normal options listed in the man pages for @command{gcc}
are available.

The @command{gupc} compiler is integrated with the @command{gcc} compiler.
The @command{gupc} compiler processes input files through one or more of
four stages: pre-processing, compilation, assembly, and linking.

Suffixes of source file names indicate the language and kind of
processing to be done:

@table @gcctabopt
@item @file{file}.upc
UPC source; pre-process, compile, assemble

@item @file{file}.upci
Pre-processed UPC source; compile, assemble

@item @file{file}.h
Pre-processor header file; not usually named on command line

@item @file{file}.c
Files will be compiled as UPC source, unless preceded by @option{-x c}

@item @file{file}.i
Pre-processed source code; compile, assemble

@item @file{file}.s
Assembler source files; assemble
@end table

Files with other suffixes are passed to the linker.  Common cases include:

@table @gcctabopt
@item @file{file}.o
Object file
@item @file{file}.a
Archive file
@end table

Linking is always the last stage unless you use one of the @option{-c},
@option{-S}, or @option{-E} options to avoid linking.  Compilation errors
also stop the process, and the linker is not invoked.  For the link stage,
all @file{.o} files correspond to source files, and all @option{-l}
options correspond to libraries.  Named @file{.o} object files, @file{.a}
archives, and any file names unrecognized by @command{gupc} are passed
to the linker in command-line order.

@node Threads
@section Number of Threads

Within a UPC program, the special symbol THREADS refers to the number
of parallel execution threads.  On each thread, the special symbol
MYTHREAD refers to the thread number.  The number of threads in a UPC
application can be specified statically at compile-time or dynamically
at execution time.  Generally, the number of threads should not exceed
the number of physical central processing units or cores.

If the number of threads is specified statically at compile-time,
the special symbol THREADS is a constant and can be used freely in any
context where a constant is required by the C language specification
(for example, in array dimensions in an array declaration).  See the
@option{-fupc-threads-N} compilation option.

If the number of threads is specified dynamically at execution time, the
special symbol THREADS is assigned at run-time, and THREADS can be used
in array declarations only if the array is qualified as @code{shared} and
only if one and only one of the shared array's dimensions is specified
as an integral multiple of THREADS.  See the @option{-fupc-threads-N}
execution option.

@c man end

@node Invoking Gupc
@section Invoking @command{gupc}

@c man begin SYNOPSIS
gupc @r{[}@var{options}@r{]} @file{files}
@c man end

@node Gupc Options
@section @command{gupc} Options

@c man begin OPTIONS
@command{gupc} accepts the following UPC-specific options:

@subsection Information Options
@table @gcctabopt
@item -v
@cindex @option{-v}
Print (on standard error output) the commands executed to run the stages 
of compilation.  Also print the version number of the compiler driver 
program and of the preprocessor and the compiler proper.
@end table

@subsection Language Options

@table @gcctabopt
@item -x upc
@cindex @option{-x}
All source files ending in @file{.upc}, @file{.c}, or @file{.upci} will
be compiled by the @command{gupc} compiler. The @option{-x upc} option
tells the compiler to process all of the following file names as 
UPC source code, ignoring the default language typically associated 
with filename extensions.

@item -n N
@itemx -fupc-threads-N
Specify the number of threads at compile-time as @option{N}.  See the
Number of Threads section, above.

@item -fupc-pthreads-model-tls
@cindex @option{-fupc-pthreads-model-tls}
Compile for the POSIX threads (pthreads) environment. Each UPC thread
is directly mapped to one pthread.

@item -fupc-inline-lib
@cindex @option{-fupc-inline-lib}
Inline UPC run-time library calls. This option is turned on by default 
when compiled with optimization and the @option{-fno-upc-inline-lib} option 
must be specified to turn it off. In general, inlining of run-time 
library calls produces larger code. Turn it off if more 
condensed code is required.
@end table

@subsection Debugging Options

@table @gcctabopt
@item -g
@cindex @option{-g}
Produce symbolic debugging information

@item -dwarf-2-upc
@cindex @option{-dwarf-2-upc}
Generate UPC-specific symbolic DWARF-2 debugging information.  This
debugging information is processed by UPC-aware debuggers including
GDB-UPC, a variant of the GDB debugger, and the commercially available
Totalview debugger.

@item -fupc-debug
@cindex @option{-fupc-debug}
Generate calls to the UPC run-time library that include source filename and line
number information that is used to print more informative error messages when
errors are detected at run-time.
@end table

@subsection Instrumentation Options

@table @gcctabopt
@item --inst
@cindex @option{--inst}
@itemx -fupc-instrument
@cindex @option{-fupc-instrument}
Instrument UPC shared accesses and library calls using GASP tool 
support. This option implies @option{-fno-upc-inline-lib}.

@item --inst-functions
@cindex @option{--inst-functions}
@itemx -fupc-instrument-functions
@cindex @option{-fupc-instrument-functions}
Instrument functions calls using GASP tool support. This option implies 
@option{-fupc-instrument} and @option{-fno-upc-inline-lib}.
@end table

@subsection Optimization Options

@table @gcctabopt
@item -O0, -O1, -O2
Specify the optimization level. This is a standard GCC option that is
especially important for UPC because it enables instruction scheduling,
which increases performance dramatically for distributed data access.
Optimizations that involve a space-speed trade off, such as loop unrolling
and function inlining, are not performed.  Nearly all other supported
optimizations are performed.
@end table

@subsection Execution (Run-time) Options

This section describes options that are specified on the command
line when you invoke a UPC program.  These options are recognized by
the UPC run-time.  Before calling the @code{main()} function of a UPC
program, the UPC run-time removes all options that begin with the prefix
@option{-fupc-} and that immediately follow the UPC program name on the
command line.

@file{UPC_program}
@r{[}@option{number of threads}@r{]}
@r{[}@option{heap size}@r{]}
@r{[}@option{affinity options}@r{]} 
@r{[}@option{program arguments}@r{]}

@table @gcctabopt
@item -n N
@cindex @option{-n}
@itemx -fupc-threads-N
@cindex @option{-fupc-threads-}
Specifies, at run-time, the number of parallel execution threads
as @option{N}.  If the UPC program was not compiled with the
@option{-fupc-threads-N} option, either the @option{-fupc-threads-N}
or @option{-n N} command-line option is required when you invoke the
UPC program.  See the Number of Threads section, above.

@item -fupc-heap-HEAPSIZE
@cindex @option{-fupc-heap}
Specifies the size of the heap available to each thread
as @option{HEAPSIZE}.  A suffix of @option{K} indicates that
@option{HEAPSIZE} is expressed in kilobytes (2^10 bytes).  A suffix
of @option{M} indicates that @option{HEAPSIZE} is expressed in
megabytes (2^20 bytes).  A suffix of @option{G} indicates that
@option{HEAPSIZE} is expressed in gigabytes (2^30 bytes).  If a
suffix is not present, @option{HEAPSIZE} is expressed in bytes.  If the
@option{-fupc-heap-HEAPSIZE} option is not supplied, the run-time system
will use a default heap size of 16 megabytes per thread.
@end table

The following options specify thread scheduling and NUMA policies:

@table @gcctabopt
@item -sched-policy @r{[}cpu|strict|node|auto@r{]}
@cindex @option{-sched-policy}
Specifies the scheduling policy for threads.

@table @gcctabopt
@item cpu
specifies that threads are evenly scheduled over available CPUs.
(A CPU is a processor with a single core or a core unit in a multicore
processor.)
@item strict
is similar to cpu scheduling except that one to one mapping of 
threads and CPUs is required.
@item node
specifies that threads are scheduled on nodes if a NUMA-aware kernel 
is available. 
@item auto
specifies that the UPC run-time should not manage scheduling of UPC threads.
@end table

@item -sched-cpu-avoid n1,n2,.. 
@cindex @option{-sched-cpu-avoid}
Specifies the availability of CPUs for UPC thread scheduling.  The UPC
run-time will not schedule any thread on the specified CPUs.

@item -mem-policy @r{[}node,strict,auto@r{]}
@cindex @option{-mem-policy}
Specifies the memory allocation policy if a NUMA-aware kernel is available.

@table @gcctabopt
@item node
allocates memory first from the node on which a thread is scheduled to run.
@item strict
allocates memory only from the node on which a thread is scheduled to run.
@item  auto
lets the kernel decide the memory allocation policy.
@end table
@end table
@c man end

@node Seealso
@section Referencies
@c man begin SEEALSO
gcc(1), cpp(1), as(1), ld(1), gdb(1), adb(1), dbx(1), sdb(1).


@uref{http://upc.lbl.gov/publications/UPC-TR-Original99.pdf} 
Introduction to UPC and Language Specification, 
William W. Carlson et al., LLNL, CCS-TR-99-157, May 13, 1999


@uref{http://www.gwu.edu/~upc/docs/upc_specs_1.2.pdf} 
UPC Language Specification, 
Tarek A. El-Ghazawi et al, February 25, 2001


@uref{http://gasp.hcs.ufl.edu/} 
GASP Tool Interface, 
University of Florida

@uref{http://www.gccupc.org} 
GNU UPC web site

@uref{http://www.gwu.edu/~upc/software/gnu-upc-ml.html} 
GNU UPC Mailing List is an electronic forum for discussing 
news announcements, bug reports, planned developments, and other 
topics of interest to GNU UPC developers and users.
@c man end 

@node Gupc Bugs
@section Report Gupc Problems
@c man begin BUGS
Report bugs at @uref{http://gccupc.org/bugs}.
@c man end

@node Contributors
@section Contributors to GUPC

The current developers and maintainers of GUPC are
Gary Funck @email{gary@@intrepid.com} and
Nenad Vukicevic @email{nenad@@intrepid.com}.

GUPC was originally implemented by
Jesse M. Draper @email{jdraper@@super.org} and
William W. Carlson @email{wwc@@super.org}.

@c man begin AUTHOR
See the Info entry for @command{gupc}, or
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Contributors.html} 
for contributors to GCC and GUPC.
@c man end

@node Index
@section Index

@printindex cp

@bye
