
@comment Here are some useful examples of the macro facility.

@c Simply insert the right version of the texinfo name.
@macro texinfo{}
TeXinfo
@end macro

@c Define a macro which expands to a pretty version of the name of the
@c Makeinfo program.
@macro makeinfo{}
@code{Makeinfo}
@end macro

@c Simple insert the right version of the Info name.
@macro Info{}
@code{Info}
@end macro

@c Define a macro which is used to define other macros.  This one makes
@c a macro which creates a node and gives it a sectioning command.  Note
@c that the created macro uses the original definition within the
@c expansion text.  This takes advantage of the non-recursion feature of
@c macro execution.
@macro node_define{orig-name}
@macro \orig-name\{title}
@node \title\
@\orig-name\ \title\
@end macro
@end macro

@c Here is a special one for "@top", causing the node name to be "Top",
@c but leaving the section name as the specified title.
@macro top{title}
@node Top
@top \title\
@end macro

@c Now actually define a new set of sectioning commands.
@node_define {appendix}
@node_define {appendixsec}
@node_define {appendixsubsec}
@node_define {appendixsubsubsec}
@node_define {chapter}
@node_define {section}
@node_define {subsection}
@node_define {subsubsec}
@node_define {unnumbered}
@node_define {unnumberedsec}
@node_define {unnumberedsubsec}
@node_define {unnumberedsubsubsec}

@c The italicized analogues.
@node_define {iappendix}
@node_define {iappendixsec}
@node_define {iappendixsubsec}
@node_define {iappendixsubsubsec}
@node_define {ichapter}
@node_define {isection}
@node_define {isubsection}
@node_define {isubsubsec}
@node_define {iunnumbered}
@node_define {iunnumberedsec}
@node_define {iunnumberedsubsec}
@node_define {iunnumberedsubsubsec}

@c Manual starter:
@c 
@c Pass arguments of TITLE, AUTHOR, and a short DESCRIPTION.
@c Immediately following, insert the Top node's menu.
@c 
@c Typical usage:
@c 
@c @document{Makeinfo, Brian J. Fox, This file documents the use of the
@c @code{makeinfo} program\, versions 1.58 and later.}
@c 
@c @menu
@c * What is @makeinfo{}?::
@c @end menu

@macro document{title, author, description}
@ifinfo
\description\

Copyright @copyright{} 1994 \author\
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the copyright holders.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title \title\
@author \author\

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 \author\
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the copyright holders.
@end titlepage

@top{\title\}

\description\
@end macro
