..
  Copyright 1988-2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
  This is part of the GCC manual.
  For copying conditions, see the copyright.rst file.

.. _type-encoding:

Type Encoding
*************

This is an advanced section.  Type encodings are used extensively by
the compiler and by the runtime, but you generally do not need to know
about them to use Objective-C.

The Objective-C compiler generates type encodings for all the types.
These type encodings are used at runtime to find out information about
selectors and methods and about objects and classes.

The types are encoded in the following way:

.. @sp 1

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - ``_Bool``
     - ``B``
   * - ``char``
     - ``c``
   * - ``unsigned char``
     - ``C``
   * - ``short``
     - ``s``
   * - ``unsigned short``
     - ``S``
   * - ``int``
     - ``i``
   * - ``unsigned int``
     - ``I``
   * - ``long``
     - ``l``
   * - ``unsigned long``
     - ``L``
   * - ``long long``
     - ``q``
   * - ``unsigned long long``
     - ``Q``
   * - ``float``
     - ``f``
   * - ``double``
     - ``d``
   * - ``long double``
     - ``D``
   * - ``void``
     - ``v``
   * - ``id``
     - ``@``
   * - ``Class``
     - ``#``
   * - ``SEL``
     - ``:``
   * - ``char*``
     - ``*``
   * - ``enum``
     - an ``enum`` is encoded exactly as the integer type that the compiler uses for it, which depends on the enumeration values.  Often the compiler users ``unsigned int``, which is then encoded as ``I``.
   * - unknown type
     - ``?``
   * - Complex types
     - ``j`` followed by the inner type.  For example ``_Complex double`` is encoded as "jd".
   * - bit-fields
     - ``b`` followed by the starting position of the bit-field, the type of the bit-field and the size of the bit-field (the bit-fields encoding was changed from the NeXT's compiler encoding, see below)

.. @sp 1

The encoding of bit-fields has changed to allow bit-fields to be
properly handled by the runtime functions that compute sizes and
alignments of types that contain bit-fields.  The previous encoding
contained only the size of the bit-field.  Using only this information
it is not possible to reliably compute the size occupied by the
bit-field.  This is very important in the presence of the Boehm's
garbage collector because the objects are allocated using the typed
memory facility available in this collector.  The typed memory
allocation requires information about where the pointers are located
inside the object.

The position in the bit-field is the position, counting in bits, of the
bit closest to the beginning of the structure.

The non-atomic types are encoded as follows:

.. @sp 1

.. list-table::
   :widths: 15 85

   * - pointers
     - :samp:`^` followed by the pointed type.
   * - arrays
     - :samp:`[` followed by the number of elements in the array followed by the type of the elements followed by :samp:`]`
   * - structures
     - :samp:`{` followed by the name of the structure (or :samp:`?` if the structure is unnamed), the :samp:`=` sign, the type of the members and by :samp:`}`
   * - unions
     - :samp:`(` followed by the name of the structure (or :samp:`?` if the union is unnamed), the :samp:`=` sign, the type of the members followed by :samp:`)`
   * - vectors
     - :samp:`![` followed by the vector_size (the number of bytes composing the vector) followed by a comma, followed by the alignment (in bytes) of the vector, followed by the type of the elements followed by :samp:`]`

Here are some types and their encodings, as they are generated by the
compiler on an i386 machine:

+-------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|Objective-C type                           |Compiler encoding                               |
+===========================================+================================================+
|.. code-block:: objective-c                |``[10i]``                                       |
|                                           |                                                |
|  int a[10];                               |                                                |
+-------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|.. code-block:: objective-c                |``{?=i[3f]b128i3b131i2c}``                      |
|                                           |                                                |
|  struct {                                 |                                                |
|    int i;                                 |                                                |
|    float f[3];                            |                                                |
|    int a:3;                               |                                                |
|    int b:2;                               |                                                |
|    char c;                                |                                                |
|  }                                        |                                                |
+-------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+
|.. code-block:: objective-c                |``![16,16i]`` (alignment depends on the machine)|
|                                           |                                                |
|  int a __attribute__ ((vector_size (16)));|                                                |
+-------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+

In addition to the types the compiler also encodes the type
specifiers.  The table below describes the encoding of the current
Objective-C type specifiers:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Specifier
     - Encoding

   * - ``const``
     - ``r``
   * - ``in``
     - ``n``
   * - ``inout``
     - ``N``
   * - ``out``
     - ``o``
   * - ``bycopy``
     - ``O``
   * - ``byref``
     - ``R``
   * - ``oneway``
     - ``V``

The type specifiers are encoded just before the type.  Unlike types
however, the type specifiers are only encoded when they appear in method
argument types.

Note how ``const`` interacts with pointers:

+---------------------------+-----------------+
|Objective-C type           |Compiler encoding|
+===========================+=================+
|.. code-block:: objective-c|``ri``           |
|                           |                 |
|  const int                |                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------+
|.. code-block:: objective-c|``^ri``          |
|                           |                 |
|  const int*               |                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------+
|.. code-block:: objective-c|``r^i``          |
|                           |                 |
|  int *const               |                 |
+---------------------------+-----------------+

``const int*`` is a pointer to a ``const int``, and so is
encoded as ``^ri``.  ``int* const``, instead, is a ``const``
pointer to an ``int``, and so is encoded as ``r^i``.

Finally, there is a complication when encoding ``const char *``
versus ``char * const``.  Because ``char *`` is encoded as
``*`` and not as ``^c``, there is no way to express the fact
that ``r`` applies to the pointer or to the pointee.

Hence, it is assumed as a convention that ``r*`` means ``const
char *`` (since it is what is most often meant), and there is no way to
encode ``char *const``.  ``char *const`` would simply be encoded
as ``*``, and the ``const`` is lost.

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 2


.. _legacy-type-encoding:

Legacy Type Encoding
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unfortunately, historically GCC used to have a number of bugs in its
encoding code.  The NeXT runtime expects GCC to emit type encodings in
this historical format (compatible with GCC-3.3), so when using the
NeXT runtime, GCC will introduce on purpose a number of incorrect
encodings:

* the read-only qualifier of the pointee gets emitted before the '^'.
  The read-only qualifier of the pointer itself gets ignored, unless it
  is a typedef.  Also, the 'r' is only emitted for the outermost type.

* 32-bit longs are encoded as 'l' or 'L', but not always.  For typedefs,
  the compiler uses 'i' or 'I' instead if encoding a struct field or a
  pointer.

* ``enum`` s are always encoded as 'i' (int) even if they are actually
  unsigned or long.

In addition to that, the NeXT runtime uses a different encoding for
bitfields.  It encodes them as ``b`` followed by the size, without
a bit offset or the underlying field type.

.. _@encode:

@encode
^^^^^^^

GNU Objective-C supports the ``@encode`` syntax that allows you to
create a type encoding from a C/Objective-C type.  For example,
``@encode(int)`` is compiled by the compiler into ``"i"``.

``@encode`` does not support type qualifiers other than
``const``.  For example, ``@encode(const char*)`` is valid and
is compiled into ``"r*"``, while ``@encode(bycopy char *)`` is
invalid and will cause a compilation error.

.. _method-signatures:

Method Signatures
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This section documents the encoding of method types, which is rarely
needed to use Objective-C.  You should skip it at a first reading; the
runtime provides functions that will work on methods and can walk
through the list of parameters and interpret them for you.  These
functions are part of the public 'API' and are the preferred way to
interact with method signatures from user code.

But if you need to debug a problem with method signatures and need to
know how they are implemented (i.e., the 'ABI'), read on.

Methods have their 'signature' encoded and made available to the
runtime.  The 'signature' encodes all the information required to
dynamically build invocations of the method at runtime: return type
and arguments.

The 'signature' is a null-terminated string, composed of the following:

* The return type, including type qualifiers.  For example, a method
  returning ``int`` would have ``i`` here.

* The total size (in bytes) required to pass all the parameters.  This
  includes the two hidden parameters (the object ``self`` and the
  method selector ``_cmd``).

* Each argument, with the type encoding, followed by the offset (in
  bytes) of the argument in the list of parameters.

For example, a method with no arguments and returning ``int`` would
have the signature ``i8@0:4`` if the size of a pointer is 4.  The
signature is interpreted as follows: the ``i`` is the return type
(an ``int``), the ``8`` is the total size of the parameters in
bytes (two pointers each of size 4), the ``@0`` is the first
parameter (an object at byte offset ``0``) and ``:4`` is the
second parameter (a ``SEL`` at byte offset ``4``).

You can easily find more examples by running the 'strings' program
on an Objective-C object file compiled by GCC.  You'll see a lot of
strings that look very much like ``i8@0:4``.  They are signatures
of Objective-C methods.