\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gccint.info
@c INTERNALS is used by md.texi to determine whether to include the
@c whole of that file, in the internals manual, or only the part
@c dealing with constraints, in the user manual.
@set INTERNALS

@c See miscellaneous notes in gcc.texi on checks/things to do.

@include gcc-common.texi

@settitle GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Internals

@c Create a separate index for command line options.
@defcodeindex op
@c Merge the standard indexes into a single one.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp

@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 1988, 1989, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998,
1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@end copying
@ifnottex
@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* gccint: (gccint).            Internals of the GNU Compiler Collection.
@end direntry
This file documents the internals of the GNU compilers.
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@setchapternewpage odd
@titlepage
@center @titlefont{GNU Compiler Collection Internals}
@sp 2
@center by Richard M. Stallman and the GCC Developer Community
@sp 3
@center Last updated 23 May 2004
@sp 1

@center for GCC @value{version-GCC}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
For GCC Version @value{version-GCC}@*
@sp 1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@summarycontents
@contents
@page

@node Top, Contributing,, (DIR)
@top Introduction
@cindex introduction

This manual documents the internals of the GNU compilers, including
how to port them to new targets and some information about how to
write front ends for new languages.  It corresponds to GCC version
@value{version-GCC}.  The use of the GNU compilers is documented in a
separate manual.  @xref{Top,, Introduction, gcc, Using the GNU
Compiler Collection (GCC)}.

This manual is mainly a reference manual rather than a tutorial.  It
discusses how to contribute to GCC (@pxref{Contributing}), the
characteristics of the machines supported by GCC as hosts and targets
(@pxref{Portability}), how GCC relates to the ABIs on such systems
(@pxref{Interface}), and the characteristics of the languages for
which GCC front ends are written (@pxref{Languages}).  It then
describes the GCC source tree structure and build system, some of the
interfaces to GCC front ends, and how support for a target system is
implemented in GCC@.

Additional tutorial information is linked to from
@uref{http://gcc.gnu.org/readings.html}.

@menu
* Contributing::    How to contribute to testing and developing GCC.
* Portability::     Goals of GCC's portability features.
* Interface::       Function-call interface of GCC output.
* Libgcc::          Low-level runtime library used by GCC.
* Languages::       Languages for which GCC front ends are written.
* Source Tree::     GCC source tree structure and build system.
* Passes::          Order of passes, what they do, and what each file is for.
* Trees::           The source representation used by the C and C++ front ends.
* RTL::             The intermediate representation that most passes work on.
* Machine Desc::    How to write machine description instruction patterns.
* Target Macros::   How to write the machine description C macros and functions.
* Host Config::     Writing the @file{xm-@var{machine}.h} file.
* Fragments::       Writing the @file{t-@var{target}} and @file{x-@var{host}} files.
* Collect2::        How @code{collect2} works; how it finds @code{ld}.
* Header Dirs::     Understanding the standard header file directories.
* Type Information:: GCC's memory management; generating type information.

* Funding::         How to help assure funding for free software.
* GNU Project::     The GNU Project and GNU/Linux.

* Copying::         GNU General Public License says
                     how you can copy and share GCC.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: How you can copy and share this manual.
* Contributors::    People who have contributed to GCC.

* Option Index::    Index to command line options.
* Index::	    Index of concepts and symbol names.
@end menu

@include contribute.texi
@include portability.texi
@include interface.texi
@include libgcc.texi
@include languages.texi
@include sourcebuild.texi
@include passes.texi
@include c-tree.texi
@include rtl.texi
@include md.texi
@include tm.texi
@include hostconfig.texi
@include fragments.texi
@include collect2.texi
@include headerdirs.texi
@include gty.texi

@include funding.texi
@include gnu.texi
@include gpl.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c GFDL
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@include fdl.texi

@include contrib.texi

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Indexes
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Option Index
@unnumbered Option Index

GCC's command line options are indexed here without any initial @samp{-}
or @samp{--}.  Where an option has both positive and negative forms
(such as @option{-f@var{option}} and @option{-fno-@var{option}}),
relevant entries in the manual are indexed under the most appropriate
form; it may sometimes be useful to look up both forms.

@printindex op

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Epilogue
@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------

@bye
