@c Copyright (C) 2009-2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GCC manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gcc.texi.

@node C++ Implementation
@chapter C++ Implementation-Defined Behavior
@cindex implementation-defined behavior, C++ language

A conforming implementation of ISO C++ is required to document its
choice of behavior in each of the areas that are designated
``implementation defined''.  The following lists all such areas,
along with the section numbers from the ISO/IEC 14882:1998 and ISO/IEC
14882:2003 standards.  Some areas are only implementation-defined in
one version of the standard.

Some choices depend on the externally determined ABI for the platform
(including standard character encodings) which GCC follows; these are
listed as ``determined by ABI'' below.  @xref{Compatibility, , Binary
Compatibility}, and @uref{https://gcc.gnu.org/readings.html}.  Some
choices are documented in the preprocessor manual.
@xref{Implementation-defined behavior, , Implementation-defined
behavior, cpp, The C Preprocessor}.  Some choices are documented in
the corresponding document for the C language.  @xref{C
Implementation}.  Some choices are made by the library and operating
system (or other environment when compiling for a freestanding
environment); refer to their documentation for details.

@menu
* Conditionally-supported behavior::
* Exception handling::
@end menu

@node Conditionally-supported behavior
@section Conditionally-Supported Behavior

@cite{Each implementation shall include documentation that identifies
all conditionally-supported constructs that it does not support (C++0x
1.4).}

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cite{Whether an argument of class type with a non-trivial copy
constructor or destructor can be passed to ... (C++0x 5.2.2).}

Such argument passing is supported, using the same
pass-by-invisible-reference approach used for normal function
arguments of such types.

@end itemize

@node Exception handling
@section Exception Handling

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cite{In the situation where no matching handler is found, it is
implementation-defined whether or not the stack is unwound before
std::terminate() is called (C++98 15.5.1).}

The stack is not unwound before std::terminate is called.

@end itemize
