@c Copyright (C) 2018-2019 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GCC manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file gcc.texi.

@ignore
@c man begin COPYRIGHT
Copyright @copyright{} 2017-2018 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``Funding
Free Software'', the Front-Cover texts being (a) (see below), and with
the Back-Cover Texts being (b) (see below).  A copy of the license is
included in the gfdl(7) man page.

(a) The FSF's Front-Cover Text is:

     A GNU Manual

(b) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is:

     You have freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU
     software.  Copies published by the Free Software Foundation raise
     funds for GNU development.
@c man end
@c Set file name and title for the man page.
@setfilename lto-dump
@settitle Tool for dumping LTO object files.
@end ignore

@node lto-dump
@chapter @command{lto-dump}---Tool for dumping LTO object files.

@menu
* lto-dump Intro::             Introduction to lto-dump.
* Invoking lto-dump::          How to use lto-dump.
@end menu

@node lto-dump Intro
@section Introduction to @command{lto-dump}
@c man begin DESCRIPTION

@command{lto-dump} is a tool you can use in conjunction with GCC to
dump link time optimization object files.

@c man end

@node Invoking lto-dump
@section Invoking @command{lto-dump}

@smallexample
Usage: lto-dump @r{[}@var{OPTION}@r{]} ... @var{objfiles}
@end smallexample

@command{lto-dump} accepts the following options:

@ignore
@c man begin SYNOPSIS
lto-dump [@option{-list}]
     [@option{-demangle}]
     [@option{-defined-only}]
     [@option{-print-value}]
     [@option{-name-sort}]
     [@option{-size-sort}]
     [@option{-reverse-sort}]
     [@option{-no-sort}]
     [@option{-symbol=}]
     [@option{-objects}]
     [@option{-type-stats}]
     [@option{-tree-stats}]
     [@option{-gimple-stats}]
     [@option{-dump-level=}]
     [@option{-dump-body=}]
     [@option{-help}] @var{lto-dump}
@c man end
@end ignore

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @gcctabopt
@item -list
Dumps list of details of functions and variables.

@item -demangle
Dump the demangled output.

@item -defined-only
Dump only the defined symbols.

@item -print-value
Dump initial values of the variables.

@item -name-sort
Sort the symbols alphabetically.

@item -size-sort
Sort the symbols according to size.

@item -reverse-sort
Dump the symbols in reverse order.

@item -no-sort
Dump the symbols in order of occurrence.

@item -symbol=
Dump the details of specific symbol.

@item -objects
Dump the details of LTO objects.

@item -type-stats
Dump the statistics of tree types.

@item -tree-stats
Dump the statistics of trees.

@item -gimple-stats
Dump the statistics of gimple statements.

@item -dump-level=
For deciding the optimization level of body.

@item -dump-body=
Dump the specific gimple body.

@item -help
Display the dump tool help.

@end table

@c man end
